
  WATTCP - TCP/IP library routines

  Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Erick Engelke

  Portions Copyright (c) 1993  Quentin Smart
  Portions Copyright (c) 1991  University of Waterloo
  Portions Copyright (c) 1990  National Center for Supercomputer Applications
  Portions Copyright (c) 1990  Clarkson University
  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1986, Imagen Corporation

     This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
     but without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
     merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

  RESTRICTIONS
  ------------
  You may freely use this library to produce programs which you may give
  away or sell in source format, or as compiled executables, or both.

  You may not sell this library or a portion thereof or distribute modified
  versions the library code in either source or OBJect or LIBrary format
  without written permission from the author.  The author still maintains
  copyright privileges and will assert the privileges of ownership for
  purposes of royalties such distributions.

  Portions of this code were written or enhanced by others and offerred
  to me for distribution in WATTCP under my copyright.  To my knowledge,
  all copyrights exercised are listed at the top of this file.  If this
  is incorrect, please contact me so I can rectify the situation.


  OFFICIAL SITE
  -------------
  The official distribution site for WATTCP (and many other TCP goodies)
  is dorm.rutgers.edu in pub/msdos/wattcp  (thanks Jim!)

  That is where I upload the latest libraries, my own free applications
  and other applications I have collected and find useful.


  DOCUMENTATION
  -------------
  A programmer's reference manual I wrote is now available from the
  publisher.  They provide no additional support and cannot help
  you with any aspect of the software.  But they do pay a royalty
  to me which has been used to compensate my costs for developing
  this software and extending it, so I am very appreciative.

  That manual is copyrighted and protected by international law.
  It may not be copied without the authors permission.  And its
  sale does not constitute a warranty or an automatic license to
  use WATTCP beyond the terms described in this file.

  For payment they accept credit cards, cheques, checks, money orders
  and P.O.s.  Credit card orders can be processed over the telephone.

  Note that they are located in Canada and mail to them MAY REQUIRE
  additional postage depending on where you live.  Also, be sure to
  use the entire address, including the last line.  Canada is a heck
  of a large country and that line really makes a difference.

  Prices are listed in US dollars for convienence to our many
  international readers.  The value charged on credit card items
  will be the equivalent in Canadian dollars at the exchange rate
  of the day.

  WATTCP Manual          $ 40  US funds for each manual orderred
                    ----------
  Shipping + Handling    $  5  US funds to North America
  (Air Mail)          or $ 10  US funds to anywhere else in the world

                    ADD  $ 20  US funds IF YOU ARE USING PURCHASE ORDERS
                               in which case payment is due in 30 days.
                               Not necessary for cheques, credit cards, etc.
                    ----------

         WATTCP Manual
         c/o Supro Network Software Inc.
         P.O. Box 18,
         Warsaw, Ont.
         CANADA
         K0L 3A0

 Phone (705) 652-1572 and be certain to mention that you are talking
 about the WATTCP manual.

 Please note, I am not involved in the processing loop for the manual
 and cannot tell you of the status of your order.  Use Supro's number
 instead.


 Developers' Meeting Place
 -------------------------
 Many of the key people involved in WATTCP frequent the
 comp.protocols.tcp-ip.ibmpc Usenet newgroup, and there
 are several people there who can answer most any question.

 If you need my personal attention (I seem to have less and less
 available) you will have to Email my address below.  I cannot take
 phone calls relating to WATTCP at my place of occupation.


      Erick Engelke                erick@dorm.rutgers.edu
      48 Daytona St.
      Kitchener, Ont.
      Canada



